[CONTENT] Blog: GUI setup, Part 2 (Partitioning) (#124)
reactos/web-content: content/blogs/gui-setup-part2-partitioning.md

---
title:      "1st-stage GUI setup, Part 2 - October-November 2023: Making partitioning UI work"
author:     "hbelusca"
date:       2024-01-23
tags:       [ newsletter, gui-setup ]
---

Greetings!

As you may have noticed, I have been quite silent about my work and not writing, on a regular basis, blog posts about what I have done so far.
Well, I am more concerned about getting _actual_ code written and working before discussing about it,
instead of doing that about half-done not-yet-tested code, much like what the GUI setup was during these previous months.

> This is why it is only now that I am presenting, in this second blog post, the work I made during the months of [October](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Kx80SmSkj1IdomVC9gcbA_MJ7XFiz_YlYYVxoxv-Jgs/view#gid=711109022) and [November](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Kx80SmSkj1IdomVC9gcbA_MJ7XFiz_YlYYVxoxv-Jgs/view#gid=1783614271) 2023, in preparation for the new 1st-stage ReactOS GUI setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's why the second blog post is out just by now, presenting the work I made during the months of [October](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Kx80SmSkj1IdomVC9gcbA_MJ7XFiz_YlYYVxoxv-Jgs/view#gid=711109022) and [November](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Kx80SmSkj1IdomVC9gcbA_MJ7XFiz_YlYYVxoxv-Jgs/view#gid=1783614271) 2023, in preparation for the new 1st-stage ReactOS GUI setup.
```

Author: I'm choosing @cbialorucki's suggestion, that is closer to what I had in mind.

### In the usual text-mode setup

Long-time ReactOS users (and Windows XP/2k3 alike) certainly remember that, during the 1st-stage _text-mode_ setup ("USETUP"), disk partitions can be created, deleted, and selected from the partition list screen.

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/usetup_partition_list.png" src="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/usetup_partition_list.png" caption="USETUP - Partition list">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

While the creation/deletion operations made from this screen are not immediately applied to the disk, they get applied _as soon_ as the user selects a suitable partition, or an eligible empty space, for installing ReactOS.
There, the new partition layout is written to the disk and the installation continues, with the choice of a filesystem for formatting the selected or newly-created partitions.

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/usetup_partition_filesystem.png" src="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/usetup_partition_filesystem.png" caption="USETUP - Partition filesystem selection">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

The actual partition formatting takes place after the filesystem selection.

> Once all the newly-created partitions (and perhaps the selected one) have been formatted, they are checked for filesystem defects.

Author: I would like to avoid the change "Once" -> "After" here, because otherwise "After" would be repeated yet again at the next paragraph.

This is particularly true for the selected [_boot partition_](http://jdebp.info/FGA/boot-and-system-volumes.html) for ReactOS installation
(as well as the [_system partition_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_partition_and_boot_partition) where the bootloader is installed; these can be the same usually on BIOS-based PCs, but can otherwise be different).

After all these steps have been performed, the installer inquires the user for the ReactOS installation directory, and where to install the bootloader.
The ReactOS installation proper then begins, with file copy and saving the settings,

> then continues after system restart with the 2nd-stage installer.

Author: i wanted here to indirectly emphasize it's the computer or whatever thing ReactOS is running, that restarts.

### Workflow change in the GUI-mode setup

Albeit the installation workflow used by the text-mode USETUP _might_ make sense, from a UI perspective (each action is done from a different screen; only forward progress is allowed, and once an action has been chosen, it cannot be undone by e.g. going back to previous screens), the GUI-mode setup changes some of these assumptions.
The wizard-style of the GUI setup allows going back and forth within the different pages.

Its partitioning page shows a minimal interface, similar to the text-mode one, but more reminiscent of other GUI partitioning software.

Changing the disk partition layout and formatting new or existing partitions can be considered to be a sensitive operation -- existing partitions or filesystems can be destroyed after all!
The user then may feel more comfortable performing such operations virtually, viewing the resulting changes, knowing they haven't yet been actually applied, until his/her final choice has been made.

> This is why, for example, 3rd-party partitioning software allow to stash (queue) all these changes, allowing for a careful review before actually applying them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is why, for example, 3rd-party partitioning software allow to stash (queue) all these changes, allowing to review them carefully before actually applying.
```

Author: @cbialorucki : Is "allowing to" OK in this case?

Reviewer 2: This entire sentence is difficult. Maybe try something like this:
```suggestion
This is why, for example, 3rd-party partitioning software allows the user to stash (queue) all these changes, allowing him or her to carefully review the changes before applying them.
```

Reviewer: Suggestion for the suggestion:
```suggestion
This is why, for example, 3rd-party partitioning software allows users to stash (queue) all these changes, allowing them to carefully review the changes before applying them.
```

- Better unify the helper functions used to create partitions: see GitHub [PR #5837](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/5837).
The existing code was differentating between "primary", "logical" and "extended" partitions. This makes sense for MBR-based disks only, but does not anywhere else (GPT disks...).
These partition creation helpers now automatically deduce their actual type -- the only exception being for "extended" partitions for MBR disks only.

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_createpart_dlg.png" src="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_createpart_dlg.png" caption="GUI setup - The new \"Create and Format Partition\" dialog">}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_old_createpart_dlg.png" src="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_old_createpart_dlg.png" caption="The old \"Create Partition\" dialog, for comparison">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

## What's next -- partition-wise

Partition handling code is now present in the GUI setup.
However, it requires a few improvements:

> - Being able to select an eligible (_i.e._ large enough, where a partition entry can be created on it) empty disk space and still be able to install ReactOS on it.

Author: I mean here, empty space in the disk, that can, for example, be present between two other separate existing partitions.

> - Being able to select an eligible (_i.e._ large enough, where a partition entry can be created on it) empty disk space and still be able to install ReactOS on it.

Reviewer 2: I made a new suggestion for this bullet point.

- Better unify the helper functions used to create partitions: see GitHub [PR #5837](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/5837).
The existing code was differentating between "primary", "logical" and "extended" partitions. This makes sense for MBR-based disks only, but does not anywhere else (GPT disks...).
These partition creation helpers now automatically deduce their actual type -- the only exception being for "extended" partitions for MBR disks only.

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_createpart_dlg.png" src="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_createpart_dlg.png" caption="GUI setup - The new \"Create and Format Partition\" dialog">}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_old_createpart_dlg.png" src="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_old_createpart_dlg.png" caption="The old \"Create Partition\" dialog, for comparison">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

## What's next -- partition-wise

Partition handling code is now present in the GUI setup.
However, it requires a few improvements:

> - Being able to select an eligible empty disk space and still be able to install ReactOS onto it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Being able to select empty disk space between partitions and install ReactOS onto it.
```

Author: looks better :+1:

---
title:      "1st-stage GUI setup - October-November 2023: Making partitioning UI work"
author:     "hbelusca"
date:       2024-01-11
tags:       [ newsletter, gui-setup ]
---

Greetings!

As you may have noticed, I have been quite silent about my work, not writing on a regular basis blog entries about what I have done so far.
Well, I am more concerned about getting _actual_ coding done and working before writing about it, instead of writing about half-done not-yet-tested code, much like what the GUI setup code was during these previous months.

This is why it is only now that I'm presenting, in this second blog post, the work I made during the months of October and November, in preparation for the new 1st-stage ReactOS GUI setup.

> During the first week of October I finished addressing some last issues that arose with the partial setupapi winesync [I started back in September](/blogs/gui-setup-part1-setupapi).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
During the first week of October I finished addressing some last issues that arose with the partial setupapi winesync [that I started back in September](/blogs/gui-setup-part1-setupapi).
```

I then finally started the main part of this project: working on the GUI setup proper.
The main necessary work for it resides in three functionalities:
- disk partitioning and bootloader installation,
- file copying,
- settings saving in registry.

> While the last two features were already partly implemented (most of the code being shared with the existing text-mode installer ``USETUP'') and will be discussed in future blog posts, the first feature: disk partitioning, necessitated more work than I originally anticipated. Indeed, this functionality is shared with USETUP, but is used in a slightly different manner in the GUI setup.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - While the last two features were already partly implemented (most of the code being shared with the existing text-mode installer `USETUP`) and will be discussed in future blog posts, the first feature: disk partitioning, necessitated more work than I originally anticipated. Indeed, this functionality is shared with USETUP, but is used in a slightly different manner in the GUI setup.
```

Author: Added this paragraph instead in its own separate line.

## Partitioning workflow - Text-mode versus GUI-mode setup

# On the usual text-mode setup

> Long-time ReactOS users (and Windows XP/2k3 alike) certainly remember that, during the 1st-stage _text-mode_ setup (hereafter called ``USETUP''), disk partitions can be created, deleted, and selected from the partition list screen.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Long-time ReactOS users (and Windows XP/2k3 alike) certainly remember that, during the 1st-stage _text-mode_ setup (hereafter called `USETUP`), disk partitions can be created, deleted, and selected from the partition list screen.
```

<<< IMAGE PARTITION LIST USETUP >>>

While the creation/deletion operations made from this screen are not applied immediately to the disk, they get applied _as soon_ as the user selects a suitable (created or existing) partition, or an eligible empty space, for installing ReactOS.
There, the new partition layout is written to the disk, then installation continues with the selection of a filesystem for formatting newly-created partitions, and for the selected one as well.

<<< IMAGE FILESYSTEM SELECTION >>>

Once a suitable filesystem is chosen, the actual formatting of the partition takes place.

> After all the newly-created partitions (and perhaps the selected one) have been formatted, these new partitions are checked for defect with CHKDSK.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After all the newly-created partitions (and perhaps the selected one) have been formatted, these new partitions are checked for defects with CHKDSK.
```

> This is particularly true for the selected ([_boot_](http://homepage.ntlworld.com/jonathan.deboynepollard/FGA/boot-and-system-volumes.html)) partition for ReactOS installation (as well as the [_system_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_partition_and_boot_partition) partition where the bootloader gets installed; usually on BIOS-based PCs these can be the same, but can otherwise be different).

Reviewer 3: It is a bit weird that you link to two completely different pages (and the first one does not load for me)

Author: yes the URL is an old one I had referenced somewhere; I'll have to find an updated one.

This is why, for example, 3rd-party partitioning software allow to stash (queue) all these changes, allowing for a careful review before actually applying them.

Because of these considerations, I chose to make the ReactOS GUI setup follow a similar philosophy.
The partition page allows the user to choose the partition where to install ReactOS, as well as to modify the partition layout, keeping the changes in memory until the actual ReactOS installation is started.

<<< IMAGE ROS GUI SETUP PARTITION >>>

This new installation workflow necessitated to adapt the existing partitioning code, that is shared with the text-mode setup; to determine where and how to store additional per-partition arbitrary data state (for example, filesystem choice and formatting parameters).

Most importantly, this required two main changes in the code.
- Rewriting the formatter/chkdsk machine-state code, that was used in USETUP, to make it more generic and act as a queue whose stashed actions can be then committed at once.
- splitting the bootloader installation choice, from its actual installation code.

> This was required, because the old behaviour was to present the user with the bootloader installation choice only at the very end of ReactOS installation, and not before starting it, and the old code was not reusable elsewhere.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - This was required, because the old behaviour was to present the user with the bootloader installation choice only at the very end of ReactOS installation, and not before starting it, and the old code was not reusable elsewhere.
```

- better unify the helper functions used to create partitions.

> Existing code was differencing "primary", "logical" and "extended" partitions. This makes sense for MBR-based disks only, but does not anywhere else (GPT disks...).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  -Existing code was differencing "primary", "logical" and "extended" partitions. This makes sense for MBR-based disks only, but does not anywhere else (GPT disks...).
```

Author: This sentence was meant to be part of the "better unify the [...]" point.

These partition creation helpers now automatically deduce their actual type -- the only exception being for "extended" partitions for MBR disks only.

<<< IMAGE CREATE PARTITION DIALOG >>>

## What's next -- partition-wise

Partition handling code is now present in the GUI setup.

> It however requires now few improvements:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However it requires a few improvements:
```

- the possibility to select an empty disk space and still be able to install ReactOS on it, provided it is eligible for that (large enough, and that a partition entry can be created on it);
- the possibility to reformat from the UI an _existing_ partition:

> this is not yet possible because the formatting options currently exist only in the Create-And-Format-Partition dialog;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

This is not yet possible because the formatting options currently exist only in the Create-And-Format-Partition dialog;
```

- show in the partition list the selected filesystem for a newly-created partition, instead of showing `"New (Unformatted)"`.

----

> In the next [blog post](/blogs/gui-setup-part3-TBD-TBD), I will discuss about the other functionalities of the GUI setup, not pertaining to partitioning, as well as the problems I encountered once attempting to test for the first time the whole (still crude) ReactOS GUI installer.

Reviewer 3: I would completely remove this link, and add it back in when you write the next one.

Author: I now have the other part 3 being written and will make another PR soon, but yes.

> In the next [blog post](/blogs/gui-setup-part3-TBD-TBD), I will discuss about the other functionalities of the GUI setup, not pertaining to partitioning, as well as the problems I encountered once attempting to test for the first time the whole (still crude) ReactOS GUI installer.

Reviewer 4: s/"discuss about the"/"talk about the" or "discuss the"

Well, I am more concerned about getting _actual_ coding done and working before writing about it, instead of writing about half-done not-yet-tested code, much like what the GUI setup code was during these previous months.

This is why it is only now that I am presenting, in this second blog post, the work I made during the months of [October](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Kx80SmSkj1IdomVC9gcbA_MJ7XFiz_YlYYVxoxv-Jgs/view#gid=711109022) and [November](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Kx80SmSkj1IdomVC9gcbA_MJ7XFiz_YlYYVxoxv-Jgs/view#gid=1783614271) 2023, in preparation for the new 1st-stage ReactOS GUI setup.

During the first week of October I finished addressing some last issues that arose with the partial setupapi winesync [that I started back in September](/blogs/gui-setup-part1-setupapi).

I then finally started the main part of this project: working on the GUI setup proper.
The main necessary work for it resides in three functionalities:
- disk partitioning and bootloader installation,
- file copying,
- settings saving in registry.

> While the last two features were already partly implemented (most of the code being shared with the existing text-mode installer `USETUP`) and will be discussed in future blog posts, the first feature: disk partitioning, necessitated more work than I originally anticipated.
> Indeed, this functionality is shared with USETUP, but is used in a slightly different manner in the GUI setup.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
While the last two features were already partly implemented (most of the code being shared with the existing text-mode installer `USETUP`) and will be discussed in future blog posts the first feature, disk partitioning, necessitated more work than I originally anticipated.
Indeed, this functionality is shared with USETUP but is used in a slightly different manner in the GUI setup.
```
Yielding the sentence with a colon feels quite weird here.
